today we are going to discuss latitude
and longitude latitude is represented on
earth by horizontal lines that run east
and west did you know that horizontal
derives its name from horizon the
horizon is the area where the earth
meets the sky you can get the best
visual of this when you are looking out
over the beach depending on where you
are you can look out over the ocean and
watch the sunset or Rise over the
horizon latitude lines are imaginary
parallel lines parallel lines never
intersect here are some parallel lines
these lines will travel endlessly
through space and never touch one
another now let's look at the earth like
a pie or will the earth is a 360 degree
circle now we can divide into many
sections for instance take out one
quarter of the earth and you will get 90
degrees we can still split up the earth
again into 45 degrees and so on and so
on there are five major named lines of
latitude that we are going to discuss
today
first at 66 point five degrees north is
the Arctic Circle well love that at 23
degrees north is the Tropic of Cancer at
zero degrees we find the equator 23
degrees south is the Tropic of Capricorn
and at 66 point five degrees south is
the Antarctic Circle it's pretty easy to
find the Arctic and Antarctic circles
the Arctic Circle encompasses the Arctic
Ocean where we find the North Pole the
Antarctic Circle surrounds almost all of
Antarctica where one would find the
South Pole so if you remember where the
Arctic Ocean is in the continent of
Antarctica you should be in pretty good
shape with
however the tropics are often harder to
remember it would be easy to tell you
that the Tropic of Capricorn relatively
runs through a South Pole of Brazil and
the Tropic of Cancer runs through the
country of Cuba still I don't think that
would allow someone to effectively
remember which goes where so I have a
couple of other ways to help you
remember let's look in the dictionary
from an alphabetical standpoint the c8
in in cancer would be a found above the
C ap in Capricorn in other words the
Tropic of Cancer would be higher on the
page than the Tropic of Capricorn just
like it is on the earth
okay now let's weigh the two words let's
pretend that all the letters are the
same size and weight the simplified that
Capricorn has nine letters to cancer six
obviously means that Capricorn weighs
more and will sink below cancer see what
I did there
okay one more the Tropic of Cancer runs
through Mexico near its capital Mexico
City did you know that breathing the air
for one day in Mexico City is like
smoking 40 cigarettes and we all know
about cigarettes cause finally we need
to discuss the equator the Equator cuts
the earth and half given us the southern
hemisphere and the northern hemisphere
the equator is also the halfway point
between the north and south poles
now you may ask why do we need to know
these lines of latitude well let me
explain if you didn't already know our
earth tilts as it revolves around the
Sun causing seasons two times a year the
earth is at its equilibrium which means
the equator is facing the center of the
Sun these two times are spring and fall
as the northern hemisphere begins to
tilt toward the Sun it begins to warm at
its greatest tilt which is 23 degrees
north the northern hemisphere will
experience the first day of summer while
the southern hemisphere experiences the
first day of winter six months later the
earth reverses to - 23 degrees south at
this time the northern hemisphere will
experience the first day of winter while
the southern hemisphere experiences the
first day of summer okay just to clarify
on the first day of spring the earth
faces the Sun directly over the equator
first day of summer in the northern
hemisphere the Earth and Sun face one
another directly across the Tropic of
Cancer first day of fall we are back at
the equator in the first day of winter
in the northern hemisphere the Earth and
Sun face each other directly over the
Tropic of Capricorn now for longitude
longitude is represented by vertical
lines that travel north and south the
most recognizable line of longitude is
the prime meridian like the equator it
is also found at zero degrees did you
know that the prime meridian runs
through Greenwich England where the
chronometer was invented like the
equator the prime meridian cuts the
world into two hemispheres the western
hemisphere in the eastern hemisphere
unlike latitude longitude lines are not
parallel they all intersect at the North
Pole as well as the South Pole so why
don't we need longitude longitude is
about time since the earth is 360
degrees it can do be divided up into 24
sections at 15 degrees each so the Sun
shawne's directly over a 15 degree
section of the earth every hour giving
us time zones for instance if it is 12
o'clock at the Prime Meridian it would
be 1 hour earlier for every 15 degrees
of longitude traveling west just as it
would be 1 hour later
for every 15 degrees of longitude
traveling east finally taking us to 180
degrees longitude which is called the
International Dateline
this is the line that separates the date
if you were traveling west over the
International Dateline you would
actually gain a day and as you travel
east over the International Dateline you
would lose a day but we will discuss
this further when we get to time zones
hopefully now you understand your
latitude and longitude a little better
we'll see you next up let's go